What was to know?
Saber.
Saber, good.
What would I know be if it follows our rules?
Sabo.
But it's not
It's se.
So it's an exception.
S-e-se.
You might have heard lo se lo se literally I know it because se by itself is a bit short, so you you often hear people saying lo se lo se I know it rather than se se se
So this is irregular, very irregular S-E.
No?
But the rest of the versions of Saber are regular.
So how would you say he knows or she knows or it knows or Yupum will know?
Sabe.
Good.
So I don't know.
No sé.
We said that quiero was I want, and quiero actually is an error verb.
So how would you say I don't know what he wants?
What is what?
K no se lo quiere
Why law?
He.
Firstly you're not using the word for he, you're just saying he wants, and that's contained in the verb.
But law is not he, it's him, not he.
We didn't learn yet the word for he on purpose actually we haven't been learning these words so that we can just use the verb for now.
Okay.
So try again.
I don't know what he wants
No se ke.
Good.
You must feel comfortable with two words becoming one.
I don't know what he wants.
No se ke.
Good.
The word for he is el
So if you want to be emphatic, I don't know what he wants, or if you want to show or clarify who you're talking about, you can add that.
So how would you do that?
I don't know what he wants
No sé qué él quiere.
Because the emphasis is not just in the sentences with the hands and the facial expression and the tone of voice.
So it's something much better to get live.
No sé qué él quiere.
No sé qué quiere él.
The word for she, what is the word for her first?
We want to differentiate.
What is the word for her like in I want to see her?
How would you say I want to see to view her
Quiero verla.
Good.
But if you want to say she sees, it's not her.
I want to see her, it's she.
And the word for she is ella.
Now this is spelled E L L A.
Double L in Spanish is pronounced yo.
Ella.
So if you want to say she sees
To see as ver, what type of verb is it?
R verb, ear verb, er verb.
Ver.
Huh.
It's an er.
An er verb
It seemed too obvious to us.
Sorry.
I thought you might be asking something more complicated.
No.
This is an air verb.
So how do I say she sees?
And if I know who I'm talking about, I can just say veh.
Maybe when we are contrasting in the sentence, we have a special desire to use these words
When I say contrasting, I mean in the sense maybe I say I want to invite him, but she doesn't want to invite him.
So even if we know who I'm talking about, there I will probably use the word for she because I'm making that contrast.
Again, these are things you just do very naturally without realizing it once you get practicing.
Also because your native language probably does the same thing as well.
Even if you don't have the choice whether or not to put she, like in English you always put it, you will stress it with your voice.
I don't want to invite him, but she does
So because you are stressing that with your voice in English, that's also going to carry over.
Many things are going to carry over that are positive language transfer that we might not necessarily address specifically.
So how would you say that?
I don't want to invite him, but she does want to invite him.
So I don't want
No quiero.
To invite him.
Invitarlo.
Good.
No quiero invitarlo.
But
Pero.
She does.
So actually we can just say but she yes.
What was the word for yes?
Si.
So we can just say but she yes.
How would you do that?
Pero ella sí.
Good.
Or maybe I even use the word for either to be emphatic.
Yo no quiero invitarlo.
So we said that salir was to leave or to go out.
Now I leave or I go out is salgo.
It's irregular has the g sound popping up salgo but the rest of the versions are regular so let's make them how do you say he goes out or he leaves
Sele.
Again you're making some Turkish vowel harmony here, huh?
Sorry, what's the two?
Salir.
So it's Seli?
No.
Salir?
Sale.
Saleh.
Good.
So that's Sale you put before.
It's because it just sounds better.
The mind has some kind of desire for this vowel harmony.
It's very interesting.
Sale.
Now you can make me the rest.
They or you plural?
You guys?
Salin.
Good.
And you informal?
Salas.
Sales.
Good.
Now if you want to say I'm going out to eat, how is I'm going out again?
So it should be salo, but it was Salgo?
Salgo.
So the irregularity is the same as the other one that we saw.
Tener tengo to have I have.
Venir vengo to come I come.
Salir salvo.
So that you say I'm going out to eat.
I'm not sure the word out.
This is the verb.
The verb is to leave or to go out.
Right.
So you don't need the word for out.
Salco comer.
Salco a comer.
Why did you think of the a?
I think you felt it.
No, you felt that that sense of movement.
Good.
So salgo a comer.
It's a verb of movement.
Good.
Boy a comer, I'm going to eat.
Salgo a comer, I'm going out to eat.
Very good.
What was uh I have?
Tengo.
I have it.
Lotengo.
Good.
I have them
Los tengo.
Good.
If we add on ke to tengo, and there's not really any comfortable translation for this.
But if we add on ke, we get I have to in the sense of must, have to.
So for example, if you if you say tengo ke, we get I have to eat.
So we change the meaning of tengo like have which is just possession to have to by adding ke.
And like I say, there's no comfortable translation.
K is what or that.
It's also used as that.
And we're gonna use it like this later.
But again, it's still it's still very uncomfortable to translate.
So we would just say we add ke and we get the meaning of have to
So how would you say I have to do it?
What was to do?
Begins with a silent h.
Aser.
Asar.
So I have to do it.
Tengo que hacer.
Good.
Tengo que hacerlo, lo tengo que hacer.
You have the option.
So we've seen a few verbs with this go business.
Bengo, I'm coming.
Dengo, I have.
Salgo, I leave.
And we've seen that the go just pops up.
for the I version doesn't pop up for the other versions list G.
So tiene for example is he has tiene.
How would you say they have?
Tienen.
And how would you say you have speaking informally?
Tienes.
Good.
So if I give you the version for he comes, it's Bienne.
So how would you say you come?
Informal.
Yes.
Bienes.
The word for when is quando.
Quando.
When do you come in?
Informal, vienes.
Hmm.
It's the English that's confusing you.
Exactly.
So don't let that English are you coming confuse you.
There's a lot we're doing in English there that we don't need to worry about for Spanish.
Cuando vienes.
When are you coming to eat?
A comer, very nice.
TN, what does TN mean?
Have.
Yeah, but I need you to be more specific.
I'm giving you more information than just have.
Tiene.
He, it, she, or formal you.
Very good.
Eyatiane.
Eyatiane
She has.
Good.
Quiero saber qué tiene.
I want to know what you have.
What you have or she or it.
Very good.
He said that a very interesting detail about tener is that you can also translate it as tain when this tain forms part of another verb
in English.
So contain becomes container.
No?
So how was it has or she has, he has
Tiene.
Yes, we saw that it was tiene.
We haven't looked at why yet, but we've seen that it's a little bit irregular.
In Spanish you can generalize this irregularity.
How is I have?
Tengo.
I obtain.
Obtengo.
Sounds rather formal in English, but in Spanish you might use it like get.
I get it.
Lo obtengo.
I obtain it.
To put in Spanish is poner.
Poner.
That means to put.
And I put, you have the same business with this G popping up.
So how do you think it sounds?
I put
Pongo.
And poner is interesting like tener because when we have pose inside of a verb in English, we can turn that pose into poner and we get the verb
in Spanish.
So the example would be compose becomes componer.
So to compose is componer.
How would to suppose be?
Supposer.
So compose is componer.
Suppose is Supponer.
Supponer.
And how do you think you would say I suppose?
We want to generalize our irregularities in Spanish.
So how was I put?
How was that?
I put Pongo.
Pongo
So suponer to suppose becomes for I suppose Supongo.
Yeah.
Suppongo.
And you will hear suppongo que si, I suppose that yes.
I said that ke can also mean that.
I suppose so, we say in English.
In Spanish you say I suppose that yes.
Supongo que si, you will hear that.
So we had componer, to compose, suponer, to suppose.
Imponer Imponer to expose Exponer to oppose Oponer I oppose it I oppose it
Lo opongo.
I oppose it.
Good.
And I have?
Tengo.
And we said we can add on ke to get the meaning of have to
So if you want to say I have to see her, how would you say I have to see her?
Tengok verla.
Good
We could say la tengo que ver o tengo que verla.
Both are fine.
How would you say I must see her?
I owe to see her.
Debo verla.
Or where else could you put that la?
La debo ver.
Good.
The difference between tengo ke and debo is exactly like English.
We use must when it's a bit more serious, no?
I must see her.
And we say have to like an everyday kind of thing
The way you use it in English and Spanish is exactly the same.
Sad debo is a little bit more severe, a little bit more serious, and tener que
To have to with care is more everyday.
Tengo que comer ahora.
What does that mean?
I have to eat now.
Good.
What does it mean if I say boy a intentar comer mas tarde?
Boy a intentar comer mas tarde.
Voy as I'm going.
Yes.
Intentar.
Can you see the whole sentence again?
But it sounds odd because it sounds like I'm going with the intention to eat later.
Good, but it's not a noun, it's not the intention, it's not la intention.
It's intentar.
And when you hear that R on the end, you can suspect that it's a verb.
Most of the time it's going to be.
So you want to something.
Boya intentar
I'm going to intend.
I'm going to try.
Ah.
I'm going to try to eat later.
Exactly.
Good.
So let's make a very short recap on these useful verbs that tend to have verbs coming after them in this way, like boy a.
So we had boy a, I'm going to.
I can
It might help to know that the word power is related to this word in Spanish.
Of course, when you can, when you're able to, you have the power to.
So it's related and it begins with P.
I can.
Puedo.
Puedo, good.
Boya comer.
I'm going to eat.
Puedo comer.
What does that mean?
I can eat.
Yes.
Tengo que comer.
I have to eat.
Devo comer.
I must eat.
Quiero comer
I want to eat.
Good.
So these verbs quiero, boy, tengo que puedo, debo, they're very useful because we can just put the two form after